J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter And The Philosopher's Stone is also not a simple children's fantasy; it is a wonderfully created story that starts a modern epic. Its global reach can be explained by its use of archetypal classic narratives, especially, the hero's journey, created along with the nuanced treatment of the the themes of friendship, love, the ever contrasting good and evil. The novel genius is that it is able to combine all these elements, none of which are new, and embed them into a fascinating magical universe to produce a story that children and adults can both access and appreciate, because, at the heart of the fantasy, lie profound human realities.

The novel exemplifies the hero's journey perfectly. Initially, Harry is the rich orphan, living in total neglect and abuse under the stairs, and doesn’t know of his amazing ancestry and the great things in store for him. When the "call of the adventure" comes, it is in the scene of an unrelenting flood of letters, a kind of magical reality trying to break into the curtains of his unremarkable life. The giant Hagrid comes as the herald, and in the scene of the great giant, he casts an oppressive shadow on Harry and takes him to the magical world for the first time, or more accurately, to the wonders of Diagon Alley. The transition is from the post Harry Potter ordinary, to the "every" Harry Potter extraordinary which is the magical realm of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, the place were he must confront the magical trials of his life, make his first friends, and finally the darkness that has lingered on him since the first hour of his life.

The concept of found family is of utmost importance to Harry's journey and the friendships he forms with Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger represent this perfectly. The "golden trio" as they're referred to Harry's trio of friends helps to alleviate the loneliness Harry experiences throughout the earlier parts of the story. With Ron Weasley, Harry gets everyday access to a loyal friend who introduces Harry to the different facets of the wizarding world, while Hermione contributes problem-solving skills and helps Harry with the moral quandaries he faces. Harry becomes a different person thanks to the trio dynamics. In contrast with the relationship Harry the trio has, Voldemort's relationships with the people in his life and with power suggest solitude. The contrasts suggest that dark power is not the in which to achieve one's goals. With Voldemort's solitary ambition to obtain power, love and loyalty remain the more sought after wings of the story as depicted in the scene with Harry's mother.

The underlying struggle in this story is not simply a boy against a dark wizard; it is a clash of deeper ideologies. Lord Voldemort embodies the desire for power, the pursuit of immortality, the embrace of hatred, and the belief in wizardly supremacy. In contrast, Albus Dumbledore and Harry personify love, self-sacrifice, and courage. The Philosopher's Stone is, in fact, the greatest testament to Harry's character. Voldemort wants it to be his to lose because it is the ultimate prize; he wants to die and reign endlessly. Harry wants to keep it safe but is not obsessed with the Stone. The enchantment of the Mirror of Erised, which allows only a person who wants to find the Stone but not use it to retrieve it, is a brilliant reflection of this duality. It proves that Harry's heart, not his magical ability, is what makes him extraordinary. In Harry's case, it is the heart that matters, and it is what makes him triumphant. Rowling clearly shows how a person in fear and weakness is only a testament to his strength through the conflict.