Every child has their own Saturday morning cartoon favorites. I remember a time when I looked forward to SpongeBob. He was a cute character with a fun, friendly personality, and watching his harrowing adventures in Bikini Bottom made me admire the world of imagination. I loved how the show added a dimension of creativity and humor to a child's programming. Watching this cartoon SpongeBob or any of his friends was a joy in itself and I savored every moment in front of this show.

Every afternoon I was always looking forward to watching this submerged metropolis. As soon as I heard the iconic ukulele theme song, the hustle and bustle of Bikini Bottom and all of its absurdity replaced my own world. It was a fanciful universe where the logic of reality took a backseat - where squirrels lived in underwater treedomes, crabs raised whale daughters, and a simple burger from a restaurant shaped like a lobster trap was the most coveted meal. Each of the characters was a masterclass in comedic archetypes, and yet they all felt like friends. SpongeBob’s capacity for genuine happiness inspired me in the most absurd situations. His best friend, Patrick Star, was a simple and unwavering loyal companion, and his comical dim-wittedness was childlike in a loving and sweet way. Squidward Tentacles, the nagging neighbor and a grumpy foil, was relatable. His moments of tender vulnerability in his grumpiness made him endearing. Each of these characters was a comforting and consistent presence I could rely on after a tiring day of school.

In Bikini Bottom, laughter was the top currency. The series hilariously combined a spectacular range of humor—from slapstick, to witty wordplay, to the absurd and deeply bizarre. I still fondly remember the “Krusty Krab Pizza” episode where a young SpongeBob and a squidward go on the first-ever pizza delivery quest. The unhinged dedication to the take, complete with a full song and delivery, was nothing short of comic brilliance. “Is mayonnaise an instrument?” was terribly overused, but Patrick’s question was still precious. The episode where SpongeBob and Patrick used only their imagination to have fun inside a box was, cliché as it is, a child’s dream. Those cartoons and jokes became the currency of humor with my friends. I still remember the absurdity. “I’m ready!” and “Wumbology” had us laughing and forming idiotic bonds over the insane whimsy of the series.

Every episode drifted leisure lessons, lessons Jim Ellis impactful, albeit quietly, during that time In parentheses. The deepest lesson attributed to SpongeBob and Patrick's unwavering bond was the essence of friendship. Sure they were involved in petty disputes over treasure troves and bubble blowing contests but even in defeat they were there to celebrate. Accepting defeat, embracing the boredom and finding the joy of each other was their essence. Now, SpongeBob Blas and Krab were the everyday antagonists. What distinct joy is repeated advocacy, unwavering pride and a character that dhawlers. Krab and Squid did have the most common mindset of a negative, self serving money making celery merchant but even to mundane pride and purpose. Krab's pride was to the face of the most pride filled fry cook more for the endless and cheery purpose. His taste and attitude were his uniform and purpose. The stingy attitude of Krab and Squid should of shed the endless blaas but more for the essence of each person's joy. Their purpose was to shed the purposeful joy, see the reluctance of each fry, and put pride in the face of even the most mundane job. The essence of the show is painted to all, joy is a purpose and the attitude is a choice

The impact of SpongeBob was not limited to the television screen. It became a part of my creative life and a staple in my childhood. I spent hours replicating the show's unique art style. I drew and designed new Bikini Bottom characters and residents to keep my collection interesting. I had so many shows and characters to reference that my friends and I constructed and performed our own scenes. We turned our sandbox set into a version of Goo Lagoon. I grew to love the show more as it seemed more into the cultural phenomenon. Our children’s show quotes and scene screen grabs were turned into Internet memes. It was a positive surprise to see how the creativity of the show was sustained. As an adult, I was able to appreciate it more for the subtle and sophisticated humor I was too young to comprehend. It's a show that is designed to grow with its audience.

Looking back, SpongeBob SquarePants was more than a cartoon I enjoyed. He was, in fact, a companion, a teacher, and an unending source of comfort. He created a world I could escape to, populated it with characters who were friends, and gifted me laughter in a manner that was necessary. He showed me the value in a positive attitude and the importance of steadfast friends and the limitless reaches of my imagination. An unassuming porous yellow sponge living in a pineapple was an extraordinary icon of my childhood. The silliness of it all serves to remind me that in the most absurd of things, we can discover the most profound.