Artificial intelligence has transformed from a theory of possibility to an ever-present reality. No longer a speculative futuristic idea, algorithms that predict and manage social media activities and complex AI systems that drive autonomous cars and help in medical diagnoses are now integrated into daily life. The more advanced and integrated AI systems become, the more powerful the ethical concerns surrounding the technology. The combination of the design and implementation of AI systems will require the balancing of competing ethical concerns. The ethical issues AI systems will require attention to discrimination, responsibility, the use and abuse of personal information, and a person's will or autonomy and much more. These issues, and likely many more, will need to be addressed to ensure that technological advances in artificial intelligence will help improve human well-being and social justice instead of undermining it.

Concerns regarding the ethics of Artificial Intelligence must first address the problem of algorithmic bias. AI technologies learn from the data they are fed; if these data contain societal bias, the AI will learn that bias and even amplify it. This is not a hypothetical risk; it is a demonstrated reality. For example, AI-powered hiring tools discriminated against female candidates because they were trained on data from a male-dominated industry. Similarly, facial recognition systems have a higher risk of erroneous identification and accusation of women and people of color. Algorithmic bias in AI systems used for vital decisions in criminal justice, healthcare, loan applications, or access to other critically needed resources, can produce results that are discriminatory and reinforce systemic bias. The ethical implications of these bias systems are monumental because they are built on the false premise of objective neutrality and data-driven logic while contributing to the erosion of equity and systemic fairness.

Adding to the bias is the lack of accountability, which is often characterized as the "black box" problem. The most sophisticated AI systems, specifically deep learning neural networks, are designed in such a way that even their inventors cannot fully comprehend how the system emerged. The system ingests data and produces an output, but the highly sophisticated and layered systems that arrive at a conclusion are in some situations, impossible to retrace or explain in comprehensible human terms. This lack of sufficiency in explanation presents an unequivocal ethical problem- who is liable when things go wrong and an autonomous system makes a calamitous decision? In the case of a self-driving car that is involved in a fatal accident- can we place the blame on the car owner, the company that makes the car, the engineers that designed the software, or the corporation that deployed the car? This lack of understanding in the decision AI makes makes the issue of accountability insurmountable. This lack of accountability and explanation will always lead to a lack of trust. The ethical action is to develop systems of "Explainable AI" (XAI), which will provide explanations for their decisions and actions and will allow oversight, facilitate the redress of harmful actions, and provide accountability.

AI systems raise important questions about privacy due to their unending need for data. The value of AI systems relies heavily on the size and detail of the data being processed. This has resulted in the acquisition of highly personal data, often at a levels where the individual has little to no knowledge, and far less than legally required informed consent. Digital data is collected and analyzed to surveil to varying degrees every individual, down to the most mundane transactions, communications, and movements. This continuous phenomenon of data collection and analysis constitutes a real risk to personal privacy, the most fundamental dimension of an individual's autonomy. The ethical risk is further aggravated by the use of data to manipulate behavior, and the real harm that flows from every data breach, far worse in cases of exposed personal data. The need, in an AI system dominant environment, to revise working concepts of privacy, consent, and data ownership is a clear indication of the risk to personal freedom, and the exploitation of individuals that results from the lack of a controlled private sphere in order for a society to function democratically.

AI's increased capabilities will require us to ask more fundamental questions concerning human agency, the human condition, and the future of work. The ethical implications of the potential massive replacement of human labor with machines and automation needs to be addressed, and the social and political order needs to be defended against the moral outrage of the creation of a ‘useless class’. This will require changes to be made to the education and training systems, and the possible introduction of new social instruments such as a basic income guarantee. The heavy reliance on machines to perform even the most complex tasks may lead to the loss of higher order functions such as critical thinking and decision making. The moral issue will be not to stop automation and the introduction of artificial intelligence (AI) systems, but to design human-centered AI systems that will enhance human cognition and not create a reliance that will erode the will to act and think independently. The moral issues concerning AI highlight the positive vision of the future that must be articulated and embraced.

To find a way in which our innovation reflects the very best of our humanity, we must balance the needs of humanity and innovation through empirical dialogue with a variety of participants including technologists, ethicists, and the general populace.