There is an important and critical psychological issue related to the proliferation of social media. Young people routinely and systemically undergo exposure to the net ill effects of social media in ways that others do not. While social media may seem to be a way to initiate and build a social network, the harmful effects on social and emotional growth and the net psychology of adolescents are not properly addressed.  There needs to be attention paid to the social psychology of social media, the social comparison issues, and the metrics that are available and used, including likes and social points.  

Young adolescents are in a critical stage of social and emotional development, including the formation of a social and personal identity. Young adolescents are developing the sense and means by which to socialize. As a result, they are contributing to critical psychological issues, including social media, the net effects of which have poor social and emotional outcomes. Poor social and emotional outcomes that have been observed in adolescents that have been documented include social media use that exceeds three hours at a time. The metrics used and visibility in social media that is used and created can lead to a harmful psychological cycle. This can include social validation, the loss of a sense, and self-control which in turn result in the loss of self-esteem.

Moreover, the design of these platforms replaces compassionate, real interactions with hollow, digital ones. This move away from face-to-face interactions is detrimental to the development of essential social skills, fosters loneliness, and, paradoxically, deepens isolation in the middle of hyper-connectivity. Coupled with the ever-present threats of cyberbullying and predatory digital content, the social media "connection" is say dysfunctional at best, and the 'social' media experience is detrimental to our youths far too costly. It is high time for society, and regulators to shift uptake from 'social' media to 'cyberspace' and treat it as the predatory network it is designed to be. The 'social' element of social media is dysfunctional at best and detrimental to our youths at worst. The time was long overdue for society to, and regulators to shift patterns from looking at 'social' media to looking at 'cyberspace' and treat it as the predatory network it is designed to be. The 'social' element of social media is dysfunctional at best and detrimental to our youths at worse. It is high time that society and regulators shift patterns from looking at 'social' media to looking at 'cyberspace' and treat it as the predatory network it is designed to be. The 'social' element of social media is dysfunctional at best and detrimental to our youths at worse. It is high time for society, and regulators to shift uptake from 'social' media to 'cyberspace' and treat it as the predatory network it is designed to be.